## Schema

- Every application has a single schema
- The schema is responsible for defining all aspects of the site from how and what data is stored to how people can authenticate and what information different people can access

The schema is a single large JSON object which holds infomation concering all aspects of the application.
When an application is first created its schema is initialized to an empty skeleton.

The schema is stored in the database in the table "skeem-schema". This table only ever holds a single row. When the schema is updated the table is cleared and the new schema is inserted.

The schema is serializable.

```{.javascript caption="The empty schema"}
 {
  db: {
    functions: [],
    tables: []
  },
  models: [],
  providers: []
}
```

The schema has three top level keys, db, models, and providers.

`db` holds infomation about the database. This includes a record of all tables including their name, columns indexes, and constraints. It also stores a list of custom defined functions.

`models` stores all the models created within the application.

`providers` holds infomation about the available session providers. Each provider contains a name, its type as well as specific configuration for the given provider type.

## Models

Each model has an assocated table

- Always has an id

## Attributes

Attributes have a get, set, and migrate method.

## Built in attributes

Skeem supplies a number of built in attributes. These attributes hope to cover the majority of use cases and also act to demonstrate the capabilities of the attributes system in order to act as guides for other developers implementing their own attributes via the plugin system.

### Strings

asdasdsa
strings are always TEXT columns. Postgres internally stores text, varchar and char columns in the same underlying datastructure. This means there is no performance difference between each type. TEXT was chosen as it has no limit on length nor the need to specify one. https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/datatype-character.html. They always default to an empty string and can never be null. This was done to create consistency accross an application as if an end-user is presented with an input box then they can never enter a null even if they do not enter anything it will be an empty string. This means there is a distinction between attributes which once appeared within a form and ones which did not. Therefore strings are never null.

#### Migrate

#### Get

The get method for strings is very simple.

### Numbers

- numbers are numeric or integers depending on the config.

- passwords are TEXT

- dates are timestamps without timezones

- booleans: are booleans and always default to false

- associations: store links between models. assocations go in a single direction. associations are always stored in with a joining table even if the association is a one-to-one or a one-to-many. Traditionally you would store the assocated record id within the table it self and only have a joining table for a many-to-many out of necessity. This was done because it means assocations can be transformed from a one to a many without the need for complex resolution steps involving creating a new table and then cloneing the data from the on-table column.

- file attributes: purely exist with in the schema i.e nothing changes about the database when a file field is added or removed. files are stored out of the database and a reference is inserted into the "skeem-images" table. This table stores a reference string used to retrive the file, as well as what model the image is for and the id of the record it relates to within that model.
