## Migrations

Migrations are the way the schema is mutated. They provide a simple and reversible method for manipulation.

- Migrations work to mutate the schema
- They allow multiple developers to work on a single application
- A record of all changes made to the database
- Migrations serve incremental, reversible changes to the schema
- Migrations are stored in files within a folder named migrations located in the root of a skeem project
- This allows for migrations to be transferred between computers

- only stored in files to transfer computers, the ones which get executed are actually stored in the datbaase

### Database Diffing

After a new schema has been produced for an application, a list of change steps must be realised in order to mutate the existing database. This happens are migrations are run or when the application is initialized. In the latter case the empty schema is used as the old schema.

The first step of this process is to compare the new schema and the old one in order to find what is actually different. Because the models and providers only exist in the abstract, as opposed to the db property which is backed by database tables, only the db of the schema is diffed.

The first step in diffing the dbs is to isolate which tables are new, which have been removed and which have been **potentially** updated. The name field of the table is used to link the old and the new schema. If a name exists in the old schema but not in the new, then the table is marked as deleted. Similarrly if a name exists in the new schema but not the old it is marked as created. If the name exists in both then the table is marked as potentially updated and undergoes a further diff.

For each new table the appropriate `CREATE TABLE` SQL query is generated and appended to a list of all pending database queries. Like wise for each removed table a `DROP TABLE` query is produced and appended to the list.

For each updated table each column

The list of sql commands is then executed. To do this, first, a new transaction is created within the database. This means if an error occurrs within the mutate steps the database can be fully restored to prior to the mutations. Without this then the schema could become out of sync with the database. The list of sql statements is the run sequentially. After each step has been executed the schema in the databse is replaced by the new schema. Finally, a commit message is sent to postgres informing it to proceed with the mutations. By updating the schema within the same transaction ensures syncricity between the tables and the schema.
