## Requests

All requests to the Skeem server are a post request sent to the same end point. Request bodies are JSON objects which contain two keys: `type` and `data`.

There is a second format request bodies can take - multipart data. Multipart requests are designed to effectiently transfer large data objects such as files and are designated by the content type of `multipart/form-data`. Skeem expects multipart bodies to contain a single data field named `body`. This body should be a JSON string which contains all the data normally present in a standard JSON request. The rest of the body contains file data which is processed and exposed to Skeem via the requests context. The body field is extracted and treated as the main body and processing the request continues as normal.

> Note: if more then one data field is detected, or the body field is missing, or the body field is not valid JSON then the a malformed request error is thrown and the request aborted.

The `type` part of the body is used to route the request to an apprioriate handler.

If an error is detected with a requests body at any point, either during the inital routing of the request or later after delegating by the type, a malformed request error will be thrown.

Responses always take the form of a JSON object with two keys: error and data - this is similar to stdout and stderror.

If an error is throw during a request it is first caught then it is checked against a list of known Skeem errors (Skeem errors consitently have a type and a data where the type is one of a limited number of errors). If it is a Skeem error then the response error property is set this error and the request is ended. If it is not then a new Skeem error is created of type server (the list specific type of error).

> If the system is in the development environment then the error will have the stack trace appended to it to aid debugging.
