## Fetches

All fetch requests perform a single database request independent of how simple or complex of a query is made. This is a major reason as to why skeem is so performant.

Fetches start by performing some basic type assertions about the incoming request. The request is checked to be an object with a single key. This key is ensured to be a valid model name and that this modelName actually exists. The value of the object is ensured to be an object with some subset of the keys: filter, attributes, sort, pagination. If there are any additional keys the request is deemed to be errorneous. If any of the checks fail then a malformed request error is thrown containing additional infomation explaining the exact issue.

```{.javascript caption="A malformed request and the corrosponding response"}
REQUEST:
{ articles: {},  comments: {} }

RESPONSE:
{ data: undefined, error: { type: 'malformedRequest', data: 'multiple models passed to fetch query. only one allowed.' }
```

The fetch request constructs an object name `SqlQuery`. This object holds all the infomation about the final query to be executed, such as the current columns being selected, the where conditions, the limit etc... Each step in processing a fetch request simply adds additional infomation to this object.

After the type assertions are complete and the SQL object is instantiated the next stage is to process the filter and permissions. This is dont first as there is a chance the filter may conclude that no results could be returned - in this case the request can be prematurely aborted and there was no time wasted in processing features like the attributes.

A filter is simply an operation function

After compiling a filter the attributes are processed. Attributes define precisly what data is returned. if no attributes are specified within the fetch query then only the id is returned.

Attributes take the form of an array (this is asserted by a type check) this array contains either strings or objects. If an element is a string then it is inflated becoming `{ name: "the string value" }`. This creates an array of object each with a name property. The name property on the attributes relates to directly to an attribute on the model. This is looked up and an error is thrown if the attribute is not found. The attributes get method is then called allowing attributes to fully control what it means to retrieve an attribute.

```{.javascript caption="The algorithm used to parse the attributes part of a fetch query"}
For each attribute query in the array
  if the attribute query is a string then
    inflate it to become { name: "attribute query string value" }
  end

  find the attributeSchema for the given model whose name matches the attribute queries name property.

  if the attribute doesnt exist then
    throw an unknown attribute type error
  else
    call the attributes get method passing it the attribute query object and the select statement.
  end if
end for
```

Sorting is applied next..........

Finally pagination is applied - the simplest of all the steps. Like the other steps the pagniation request is type checked to be an object with the keys of `perPage`, `page`, and an optional key of `withCount`. `page` and `perPage` are numbers and the `withCount` a boolean.

The query limit is then set to be the value of `perPage`, and an offset is calculated from `page` and `perPage` and applied. If the `withCount` option is excluded of set to true then a flag is set on the query to include the count in the final result. This flag is discussed in more depth in the following chapter on SQL Generation.

$$ offset = (page - 1) * perPage $$

### SQL Generation

After processing is done the query object must be transformed into SQL. This object is specific to the fetch query and formats its response such that it can be returned without any post processing.

```{.javascript caption="Example logic within the SqlQuery to create the final query"}
SELECT ${columns specified joined by ","}
FROM ${table name}
WHERE ${conditions specified joined by " AND "}
```

TOOD:

#### The withCount flag

If the `withCount` flag is specified then skeem ..... TODO
