# Introduction

This is the introduction
Websites are important
by 2020 50'000'000 people will have one
they take millions of hours to create....
other facts which emphasis websites

## Background Information

SPAs or single-page applications are a growing trend on the web unlike traditional architectures where each page is a separate resource with its own end-point, its own template and its own request, SPAs combine all the pages into a single end point. When a user navigates to a page they download a large javascript bundle which has the ability to construct any page of the website. The javascript is reads the url the user requested and renders the creates the appropriate views. This means that when a user navigates to another page, the javascript can intercept this and simply render new content without a network request creating a much more responsive interaction.

> :note This is a simplified example of how SPAs tend to work. In reality having a user download the entire code bundle would not be ideal, especially on slower networks. Therefore optimizations are performed such as code splitting where the user only downloads the necessary code to build the requested page and any assets needed to display loading screens, then during idle time or upon navigation download any missing code required to render new pages.

### APIs

SPAs allow for extremely responsive and interactive websites, however, they create a new issue - how do you fetch data. Previously the server was responsible for constructing the page and therefore could query the database to obtain all the information needed. The client, however, can not directly query the database and instead must communicate through an API.

An API accepts requests for specific data and responds in a pre-defined format. APIs referer to how a system is interacted with, this can include interactions with code libraries or http interfaces into a webserver, either way the qualities of a good api are the same. They provide the ability to request the required data when needed. Good APIs will consistent, flexible, and discoverable.

Consistency
: in an API allows developers to become more familiar with its uses more quickly. If you specify the ordering of items by passing an `order` variable in one situation, you should not pass `sort` in another. Consistency should also apply to the responses returned. For instance, if you request a list of addresses then you expect an array to be returned, if, however, your query produces a single item then this should still be in an array and not just be the singular object.

Flexible
: APIs do not force developers into pre-determined patterns. APIs should act to supply the needed data, not determine what data can be shown. This not only concerns being able to request all data but also being able to not request unneeded data. For instance, if when a developer requires an articles title but are forced to receive the entire body of the article then the end user will be downloading unnecessary data, which on slower networks could be significant.

Discoverable
: APIs allow developers to predict how parts will work simply from their prior experience with the system. An APIs usage should be intuitive and understandable to the point where knowledge can be gained from simply guessing as to how a part works. If you already know how to get a list of articles and you want to now gain a list of users, you should be able to figure it out without the need to read documentation.

```{.api caption="A mock example of an API request and it corresponding response."}
REQUEST: /api/users
RESPONSE: [ { name: 'Alice' }, { name: 'Bob' }, { name: 'Carol' } ]
```
