# Problem Definition

This chapter will provide an overview of the problem this project will be attempting to solve. It will provide a high level overview of existing practices, how they currently function, why they exist and why they are problems which require solving.

## Tight Coupling

APIs tend to be closely related to the underlying database storing the data. If you have a properties table, then you will want a properties API to access the data. If you were to change the name of a column within the database then you would have to remember to update the API to match and this problem grows if you have tables which span multiple APIs.

There is a similar relationship between the client and the API. When an attribute is changed on the API then everywhere using that attribute is required to update simultaneously else risk displaying incorrect responses or worse, completely crash if vital data is changed.

Tight coupling and disparate implementations leads allows for the opportunity for a de-sync which will inevitably lead to bugs.

## Authentication

Not only is it important to be able to request data flexibly but also limit what data can be accessed per user. There are many solutions for secure authentication each however have the same outcome.

## Bespoke knowledge

## Slow to Hello World

The time to hello world metric measures how long it takes to go from nothing to the first useful interaction. When starting a new web-based project you are required to setup all the previously discussed systems - database, API, authentication. This can be a very slow thing as well as being very daunting to beginners. Setting up this environment will cover a vast array of different areas each one of which comes with its own techniques and potential road blocks.

<!-- ### Problems

#### Tight coupling

#### Bespoke knowledge

- They are either very complicated
- API design usually doesn't require a team of people to maintain but everyone needs to interact with at some point, waste of time training people

- Apis tend to require knowledge which is not needed for front end development.
  Another issue with APIs is that they usually require knowledge which is not needed for front-end developers. This leads to the need for additional training.

---

#### Repetition

Consistent and discoverable APIs tend to lead to very repetitive code. If, for example, you need an end point to fetch a list of blogs and you also need one to fetch all the products. What is really different about these routes? The table name in the sql and the attributes it returns. This duplication of code leads to more code. More code equals more bugs.

---

Separation of code but a strong connection on functionality.

- SPAs require a server to interact with the database as sql is not safe to execute from a client

---

- Duplication of requests. Imagine having an end point requesting a list of blog posts. On the site you wist to display the title of each blog with a short extract from the body to act as a teaser. On this teaser you also want to display the authors name. You may also have a author page showing information about the author. This leads to an issue of either having two end points which return very similar data or reusing the end point but then forcing the end user to download more information then they actually require.

Building an API is easy, building a consistent and flexible API is hard.

---

## Authentication


## Databases

When building any non-trivial database driven application there are certain features which will need to be implemented.


* Databases are complicated

  - It requires a lot of understanding to setup and maintain a database especially when wanting to perform any non trivial, but abstractly simple, tasks such as:
    - associations
    - file storage
    - user authentication
    - permissions
    - etc
  - All these tasks are very well defined and understood yet when setting up a database you have to reinvent the wheel every time.

  - Many non-technical people could take advantage of a database yet don’t understand how.
    - Think how many excel spreadsheets get used and how complex they become
    - People need ordered and relation storage and retrieval systems

---


## Database structure vs display structure


---

## Data consistency
