## Config

Application wide configuration is done by means of a json file named `skeem.json`

- When running a command the system search recursively upwards from the current directory looking for a file named skeem.json

TODO

### Different Environments

Throughout a projects life time it will be run in multiple environements such as development or production. Each enviroment will likely want its own configuration. For instance when developing an application you would want to store files locally for speed and cost, whereas, in production you problable want to use a cloud storage solution such as AWS.

The configuration for different enviroments can be declared within the configuration file by nesting all the options within an object and making the key equal to the name of the environment. Skeem looks at the `NODE_ENV` enviroment variable in order to guage which configuration block should be loaded. `NODE_ENV` is a standard variable throughout the node ecosystem to distinguish between environments.

```{.javascript caption="An example of a config with multiple environments."}
{
  developments: {
    /* development config */
  },
  production: {
    /* development config */
  }
}
```

### Environment Variables

There are many settings in skeem for which the value may not want to be hardcoded. This may be because the value is likely to change often, may be different for each developer, or because the value should be kept secret and so would want to avoid be committed into the applications repository. The solution to that is the use of environment variables. Environment variables provide run time configuration options to many programs and are used to solve this issue within skeem.

To use an environment variable you must set the value of the configuration item to be `{ $env: 'name of env variable' }`. Skeem searches all values of the configuration for objects in this form and substitutes them for the specified variable. If this variable does not exist an error is thrown.

To further facilitate the use of these variables skeem will automatically search for a file in the application root named ".env". This file should contain key value pairs. Upon starting, skeem will automatically load this file and merge the contained variables into the environment prior to passing the configuration.

```{.javascript caption="Configuration which uses enviroment variables to avoid exposing critical infomation"}
{
  database: {
    host: { $env: "DATABASE_HOST" },
    username: { $env: "DATABASE_USERNAME" },
    password: { $env: "DATABASE_PASSWORD" },
  },
}
```
