# Introduction

Websites are becoming more sophisticated and offering increasingly advanced functionality while at the same time, expected to be more performant for end-users. Every non-trivial website is, in some part, makes use of dynamic data, that is data which can change throughout an applications lifetime. Dynamic data could include anything such as blog posts, user details, editable content, user-tailored suggestions, product listings, delivery statuses. The report details the development of a system aimed to make the retrieval and manipulation of this data trivial.

The report will start by laying the foundation for how dynamic data is handled traditionally and more recently. It will also cover the associated issues that arise with these approaches and how others have attempted to solve the issues. Next, the report shall discuss how a system that aims to solve these issues was created, including the process of building the system and how it operates. Finally, the report shall discuss how the system was tested, including the opportunities of deploying the system in re-world environments.

## Motivation

I have been a web developer for several years, being directly involved with the creation of many web-based applications covering a wide variety of scopes. Over this time, the method taken to create applications has changed significantly always towards the goal of producing better applications with similar techniques in shorter time-spans. I believe the system I have created furthers this goal.
