# Deployments {#deployment_sec}

Throughout the development i has the opportunity to deploy Skeem on many real world applications. This chapter I shall discuss those deployments, how effective Skeem has been for each and any changes that were made to Skeem because of them.

## Resooma

Resooma is a bills consolidation company focussing primarily on university students. Their website was rebuilt from scratch late last year, which perfectly coincided with Skeems development. They were the first platform that used Skeem and helped to influence many of the decisions and features Skeem now presents.

> At the time of writing, their website consists of 38 models with 397 attributes.

Having a real world application to develop Skeem for meant that Skeem is known to contain features which are practical and required for web development. Features such as pagination returning the record count and being able to associate pre-existing records, were not included until Resooma demonstrated a need for them. Resooma also prompted the need to have third party authentication methods such as Facebook and Google.

### Resooma Native

Later in the project, Resooma launched a mobile application backed by the same Skeem system as their website. Their ability to use Skeem in mobile applications demonstrates the cross platform compatibility of the client.

## Enterprise Security Distributions Norwich

Enterprise Security Distributions is a relater for security products. Over the past year, their Norwich branch has commissioned a piece of software to generate quotes for their customs and keep stock of their inventory. Skeem has been deployed as their main database system.

Their system was for internal use and consisted of many tables displaying information products, quotes, customers. Each table required a set of filters to allow them to filter their collection of more than 20'000 products. Skeem handled this filtering requirement with no issues.

Prior to this system fetch requests had a much more limited sort functionality. It was this system that prompted for additional capabilities to be added such as being able to sort by multiple attributes as well as sorting by a query path.

> Their system consists of 16 models, 22 scopes, and 257 attributes.

## Other Applications

There many other applications which are in development which have chosen Skeem as their primary method for data handling. These projects are in their early days and will no doubt help to shape Skeem as they grow and their needs change. For now, though, each one has been able to make rapid progress by utilizing Skeems ability to create and manager databases extremely quickly in a way that is intuitive for web development.

**Voluble** is a chat system as a service. It provides the ability to easily integrate a messaging functionality to a website. There needs consists of having to store, potentially thousands of records covering messages, conversations, and users.

**Rolecall** is a application that helps facilitate the management of, contract based, jobs requiring on-site work. The application includes mapping features to track workers, and messaging capabilities to enable live communication. There is also plans for a mobile application to be created in the near future. Skeem has been deemed a viable tool to use for this project.

**Inbox Integration** is a company who is using machine learning to analyze and detect fraudulent invoices. There high dependence on machine learning means the system contains many bespoke features that are not common across other websites. With Skeems ability to create a client which on the server, they are able to make full use its abilities.
