# Evaluation

This chapter outlines the whole project, covering the challenges faced during development and the future for Skeem.

## Requirements Review

Skeem has been hugely successful in solving the presented issues. Its built-in database management and declarative schema have removed any issues concerning API design. This design, in conjunction with the client library, has dramatically reduced many of the coupling issues.

The built-in authentication and file management systems not only limit the bespoke knowledge problem but also greatly removes the boilerplate required to utilize such features.

Skeem's documentation and helper library functions goes a long way in helping developers discover how to complete tasks.  This, in combination with descriptive and precise error messages, greatly helps to reduce the training time and required knowledge.

The specification gathered from the in-production database has been mostly fulfilled by Skeems capabilities with a few exceptions. There is no ability to trigger actions, such as sending an email, after creating a record. The lack of functionality means that Skeem may not be so universal as to replace database in all scenarios. This functionality was never implemented due to its lack of need on the projects I was working alongside. Another missing feature was conditional validations. Again being sacrificed for the same reason as callbacks.

## Challenges and Limitations

Before this project, I had minimal experience SQL, having only really performed relatively trivial tasks. Learning the nuances of constructing queries to complete complex tasks took significant time. The format of the fetch queries was greatly expermiented with to gain the best performance through the similist query. The mutations, on the other hand, require further expermintation as, although functional, are quite complicated for the limited functionallity supplied.

## Future Work

One of my biggest priorities for Skeem is increasing test coverage, which currently stands at just under 50%. This is an essential task as it the longer code goes untested the high chance of feature regression and the harder it is to bring new developers on board to the project.

Another big priority is adding more features which were listed in the gathered specification. These features indicate real-world use-cases and therefore fulfilling these would further Skeems viability to be used.

The client is currently a thin wrapper around requests; however, so much more is feasible. For example, one area of interest is implementing the caching of results. As Skeem controls all aspects of storing and retrieving the data, it is feasible for the client to be able to parse fetch requests and perform queries against a local cache and then only send to the server a request for the missing data. Doing this could significantly increase performance for many skeem queries.

Another avenue of development is improving the method in which migrations are created. Currently having to create attributes one at a time can be a slow and monotonous process. The CLI could implement a higher level wrapper around migrations to allow for the editing of models more directly and then derive the necessary migrations after the fact.
