# Solution

This chapter will start with an overview of what Skeem is and why it is useful. Then each part of the system will be discussed in more depth highlighting what the part does and how it is used. This chapter will not cover exactly how the system works or the reasoning behind decisions, this will be done in the chapter on implementation.

## What is Skeem

Skeem is a tool which allows developers to easily create and manage a database and then write queries to request data which can execute safely from the client side.

Skeem has developers declare a schema of what data they want to store. The system will then automatically create a database tailored to this specific information needed, including optimizations to certain columns such as adding indexes to allow efficient retrieval of associated records.

These queries are specifically designed to fulfill the common needs of web applications, including: fetching data in tree structures, authenticating requests, and handling file uploads.

Skeem is agnostic of the exact view technology that is used and provides a client which can run in any javascript environment.

Skeem can be fully setup, configured and maintained without the need to write any code. Instead it is managed through either the command line or through a graphical interface. These interfaces provide instant feedback of any errors that occur when changing things and also provide help information to aid Skeems usage. This helps to solve the issue of training. There are of course still intricacies with using various sub-systems which will require additional help, however, to solve this issue skeem contains a fully set of documentation detailing many aspects.

## Who is Skeem built for

Skeem is designed to be use by web developers.

## Value Proposition

> :comment disucss how skeem solves all the issues in the problem definition

Skeem attempts to replace the database, api, and authentication and file hosting subsystems with a single unified system.

By moving allowing queries from the front end it helps to reduce the problems of cognitive complexity as it is easy to see exactly what data is being used.

Another advantage of collecting queries on the front end is it allows developers to request exactly the data they need, this then eliminates the problems associated with API design

<!-- ---

Skeem wraps a standard object relational database but augments its functionality by providing a new query interface which is easily sanitizeable and so can be executed directly from the client side. This greatly helps to decouple the API and View layers and the view can directly query for its relevant information. This new query interfaces is designed around tree data structures and so meshes nicely with the needs of the view layer. Skeem fully manages this underlying database and the user is not required to understand how it is layed out or utilized nor do they require any knowledge of SQL to utilize Skeem.

> :comment auto generate an API based upon the database thus removing some coupling
> The ability to query from the browser fully eliminates the need for a dedicated API.

> :comment built in authentication

Skeem also provides a full authentication system capable of identifying and tracking users as well as being able limit their access to resources as necessary.

> :comment Skeem requires no code. no training required.

> :comment runs a server constantly listening to http requests

Skeem runs as a service and communication is done via http using a pure json API. This allows browsers to easily communicate with it as all ship with the ability to serialize and parse json data as well as send http requests.

> :comment websockets for live updates

Skeem exposes update events through web sockets to enable clients to automatically fetch data when it beomces stale. This allows data to be more aggressivley cached and the interactiveness of sites increased.

> :comment Must not limit the options for the view

---

Skeem replaces the database, api, authentication and file storage parts of a website. It provides all this functionallity under a single unified strcuture. -->
