## Fetching Data

Fetch requests allow developers to load specific information from the database.

Fetch requests use a declarative format, meaning the request states what data is needed and the system will calculate the necessary steps to achieve this goal. This approach is opposed to traditional SQL approach has developers write _how_ to retrieve the data, e.g. join these two tables together using this column.

Requests are made up of a target model which acts as the root for the query and some optional configuration specifying precisely the needed data. The query includes: what records to retrieve, the attributes needed for each record, and how to order the records.

A fetch response will always be an array of records, where each record will contain its id as well as the additional attributes requested.

```{.json caption="A request for fetching published articles."}
{
  // starting from the articles
  "articles": {
    // load the ones which are "published"
    "filter": { "scope": "published" },
    // get their names and bodies
    "attributes": ["name", "body"],
    // sort by their createdAt date newest first
    "sort": { "attr": "createdAt", "dir": "desc" }
  }
}
```

### Attributes

The attributes part of the query specifies what data to receive for each record. Attributes, take the form of an array where each element specifies a separate attribute. If no attributes are specified, then each record will contain their id.

When requesting an association attribute, an additional fetch query can be formulated and nested within. This query includes a separate definition of attributes, filters, and sorting. Skeem will then process this configuration in the context of the associations model whilst limiting the results to only associated records.

The attributes of the associated attribute can further contain more associations. By nesting these queries, a tree of data can be generated.

```{.json caption='Retrieving the comments attribute and specifying additional attributes and a filter'}
...
"attributes": [
  {
    "name": "comments",
    "attributes": ["author"],
    "filter": { "scope": "topRated" }
  }
]
...
```

In certain circumstances, attributes may be requested under a different name. This could be useful, for instance, if the same association attribute with two different filters is required. To alias an attribute, an `as` property alongside the attribute's name.

```{.json caption='This query will retrieve the name attribute but will name it "title" in the response."'}
...
"attributes": [{ "name": "name", as: "title" }]
...
```

### Filter

Filters restrict what records are retrieved; by default, a query will return all the records for a given model. Filters are built up of a collection of operators in an identical fashion to model scopes.

There are a wide variety of operators provided which can be combined to achieve complex calculations. There exist operators to compare two values: `eq`, `lt`, `lte`, `gt`, and `gte`. There are also operators which inject values into the query, such as `attr` which places the current value of the named attribute and `value` which injects the supplied value after sanitizing it to prevent SQL injection.

```{.json caption='A filter to return only records where the "published" attribute is true.'}
...
"filter": {
  "eq": [{ "attr": "published"}, {"value": true }]
}
...
```


### Sort

Sorting data is a ubiquitous and essential capability of data retrieval: most recent tweets, newest article, oldest person. When sorting data, a subject and a direction must be specified. The subject is the name of an attribute and defines what value to look at when sorting. Meanwhile, the direction specifies the order to position the items, either *asc*ending or *desc*ending.

```{.json caption='This query will return all articles ordered by the articles "name" attribute.'}
{
  articles: {
    sort: {
      by: "name",
      direction: "asc"
    }
  }
}
```

An array can also be used to specify the sorting criteria. Doing this will sort the data initially by the first item, then resolve conflicts with the next item in the list, and so on.


### Pagination {#pagination}

The pagination options allow for the splitting of a request into multiple discrete pages. Paginating is a common practice throughout the web as having the user download thousands of records would lead to slow and undesirable user experiences.

```{caption="This query will return the second page of articles where each page holds 30 records." .javascript}
{
  articles: {
    pagination: {
      page: 2,
      perPage: 30,
    }
  }
}
```

#### Record count

When pagination is specified, the response will additionally contain a count of the number of the total number of records that would have been received without pagination. The record count is a useful property as it allows for showing users controls to navigate between pages.

$$ totalPages = ceiling( totalRecords / perPage ) $$

Retrieving the record count can be disabled by passing the option of `withCount: false` to the pagination object.

## Mutating Data

Mutation requests allow for records to be created, updated, and removed. Mutations, like fetches, take the form of an object with a single key specifying a root model. The value then specifies the changes to apply. These changes take the form of an object function, additionally an array of changes can be passed, in which case they will be processed in order. The possible change keys are `create`, `update` or `destroy`.

For `create` and `update` requests, the value is an object where the keys are names of attributes and the values are the values for the attributes. The `update` function must receive an ID passed in with the attributes or else an error thrown.

The `destroy` method accepts a single ID as its value and will delete the record with the corrosponding id.

```{.json caption="A mutation request with multiple changes to the articles model."}
{
  "articles": [
    {
      "create": {
        "name": "A new article"
      }
    },
    {
      "update": {
        "id": "abc123",
        "name": "A new article"
      }
    }
    {
      "destroy": "abc123"
    }
  ]
}
```

When mutating associations then a similar change object is passed as the value. These changes are applied while respecting the associations i.e when creating a record it will automatically be associated. The available changes are:

- create
- update
- destroy
- add / set
- remove

The `add` function is only available for `has-many` associations and will add a relationship between two existing records. Its value is an ID of a record. The function set is similar `set` but is specific to has-one associations and will remove any previously related records.

The `remove` function will remove the relationship while leaving the records intact and accepts an ID for its value.

```{.json caption="A mutation request creating an article and an associated comment"}
{
  "articles": {
    "create": {
      "comments": {
        "create": { "body": "a comment" }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
