## Permissions and Authentication

Controlling what users can access, who can create and edit data is an essential part of all application which make use of a database.

### Authentication

Before we can control a users access we must first be able to determine who they are. Skeem provides a couple of ways in which to authenticate someone: stored identifier (email, username, etc) with a password or through an oauth2.0 provider such as Facebook or Google. These methods of authentication are referred to generally as session providers (they provide methods for authentication sessions).

Session provides define a name, model, a type and some configuration dependant on the type selected.

The name is used purely to distinguish between different providers and allows for multiple authentication strategies of the same type. You may have to distinct user sets which are authenticated with different models e.g for a school system you may have one user set named teachers and another for pupils.
The model defines where the session provider should look to find the necessary data to check against any credentials provided.

The type defines which session provider to use. Skeem comes with three built in providers: local, facebook, and google.

The local provide authenticates users by storing some identifying attribute and a password in the database itself. Then when an authentication request is made the database is queried for a record with the specified credentials. If a record is found then skeem authenticates the user as that record. The user attribute is most commonly an email address or a username. The password is stored securely using a secure hashing algorithm.

The Facebook and Google providers allow users to authenticate using these services via the familiar "login with XXX" buttons. These providers can specify a list of attributes to extract from the service such as name, email, image.

### Roles

With authentication we now have two distinct user states: authenticated and anonymous. These roles can be used to define permissions on fetches and mutates

### Permissions

Each model can define a set of permissions based scopes
