## The Client

The client is an interface into a Skeem application designed for use in client-side code. The client contains two distinct, but interrelated sub-systems.

### HTTP Server

The first sub-system is an HTTP server which listens for incoming requests, executes them within Skeem and then returns the result. All requests to this server use the POST HTTP method, and all contain a JSON payload.

The JSON payload must be of the format `{ type, payload}` where type is one of: "fetch", "mutate", "login", "logout", or "me". The payload contains the query for the given type.

```{.http caption="A HTTP request to fetch articles"}
POST / HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

"{
  "type": "fetch",
  "payload": {
    "articles": {}
  }
}"
```

### Client Library

The second client-subsystem is a Javascript library containing functions for interacting with the HTTP server. These functions essentially wrap the possible request types in order to provide a similar interface to make requests.  These functions provide all provide simple type checking on requests to ensure that the format is correct. In some cases, the response will also be modified to ensure consistency.

There are three different variations of the library each specialized for different environments.

#### Dumb Client

 The most basic of the variants' is called the "dumb" client. This client provides the most basic wrappers around the different requests. This variant is designed to be the most minimalistic implementation possible and therefore does not make any assumptions about what technologies are available. It includes functions to `fetch`, `mutate`, `login`, `logout` and `me` but at the same time must be told how to perform an HTTP request. This client is not designed to be directly used and is instead used by the other variants to prevent them from having to re-implement basic functionality.

#### Web Client

The "web" client is designed for use on websites. It provides access to the same basic methods defined in the dumb client with some additions to make using it as straightforward as possible.

The first difference is that since it is presumed to be running on the web, it can use the "fetch" API to make HTTP requests.

Another addition is that it assumes it can store information (by use of localStorage) and therefore, automatically stores and retrieves the session token. When invoking the `login` method, the client will capture the session token and send it on subsequent requests. Then upon reloading, the client will check for the existence of the token and then send it upon all future requests.

This client also presents a method to facilitate OAuth authentication, known as the "OAuth flow". This function will perform all the necessary requests to fetch the security tokens before redirecting the user to the appropriate third party portal. A response will be automatically processed, and the user authenticated. This flow function means adding a full authentication procedure to an application involves invoking a single function.

#### Server Client

The server client is designed to run in a NodeJS environment. It, therefore, assumes the ability to import a module capable of performing HTTP requests.

This client is cautious not to cache any data as an instance of this client could exist over a very long period, and requests made to it could be from many different sources. Therefore, if it were to cache, for instance, the session token, then some requests could be made with incorrect authentication information.
