## Plugins

APIs are large and complex systems which cover an incredibly broad range of use cases. It would be almost impossible to foresee every use case of Skeem and to allow for every possibility. To cope with this, Skeem has the ability to augment functionality by the way of plugins.

Plugins are javascript files located in the project folder. When the server starts, these files are loaded, type checked, and inserted into the system.

### Custom attributes

There are many different types of datum which you may want to use which don’t fit within the bounds of the built in types.

The attributes built in to skeem use this very system i.e they contain no special functionality which could not be implemented outside of the core code.

### Custom operation functions

There are a myriad of different and obscure filters you may want to perform within a database. Whilst skeem contains a lot of built-in operations designed to cover a wide variety of use-cases, it is implausible that they cover every possible desire.

Therefore, like with attributes, skeem provides the ability to create custom operation function outside of the skeem source and have them loaded in dynamically and used seamlessly with the built-in operations.

#### Creating an operation

> :comment this section is too tutorial-like it needs to be more abstract e.g what a plugin does rather then how to create one

An operation consists of a single function which must return SQL.

```{.javascript caption="The simplist custom operation - it would always return false and so is utterly pointless."}
function myPointlessOperation() {
  return { value: `'this will' = 'always be false'` }
}
```

In order to create a useful operation the function is passed some variables concerning the request. The most useful of which is the `value` argument. The `value` contains the data passed to the operation. Using this we can produce a much more useful operation.

> The SQL returned is inserted into the query as is and so is essential that it is sanitied prior to being returned.

```{.javascript caption="Returns all the records for which the name matches the value supplied. However there are major issues with this and should not be used."}
function myBadOperation({ value }) {
  return { value: `"name" = '${value}'` }
}
```

The above operation shown in figure (FIGURE XXX) would technically do something which could be deemed as useful. You supply is a value and it will return all the results for which their name attribute is equal to that value. There are a couple of issues with this operation though which means it should not be used.

The biggest and most critical issue is that it does not sanitize the value. This means it is an entry point of an SQL injection. This is relatively easy to solve though through the use of a sister package of skeem named es-qu-el. That is outside the scope of this solution chapter and is discussed in the implementation.

The second issue with the operation is that it makes the assumtion that the model you are currently fetching has a column in its table called "name". This is not always true for obvious reasons. To solve this issue we are passed another useful piece of infomation - the current model. With this we can search through the models attributes and check for the existance of a name attribute and if it does exist then throw an error.

This is an extremely common need for skeem and as such there exists a helper function to achieve this for you. It os exported from the `skeem-common` package and is called `getAttribute`. This function takes a model and the name of the attribute you wish to retrieve. By using this function you guarantee that the attribute exists and if it does not exists then you can be assured that you will get an error message consistent with that of a built in error.

```{.javascript caption="Checks to see if name actually exists on the model being queried."}
const { getAttribute } = require("skeem-common")

function mySlightlyBetterOperation({ model, value }) {
  const attribute = getAttribute(model, "name")
  return { value: `"${attribute.name}" = '${value}'` }
}
```

There is one final issue with this operation and that is it misses the opportunity for optimization. As well as returning the SQL value operations can also return the type of result expected back from the SQL - in this case it would be a "boolean". Supplying this infomation from an operation allows Skeem to optimize the SQL query and possibly not even execute anything. For instance consider the following query:

```javascript
{
  filter: {
    eq: [{ value: "a string" }, { value: 123 }]
  }
}
```

The `value` operation will return the types of string and number (as well as the sanitized SQL value). The `eq` operation then checks these types to see if they are save it is then it will place the values around an equals sign and return it as expected. If, however, they are different then the `eq` operation will return with a type of "false". If the full filter resolves with the type of "false" skeem will skip executing the query as it knows nothing would be returned. Therefore by returning the correct type skeem can potentailly optimize and avoid the database altogether.

Possible types include:

- string
- boolean
- number
- record
- collection
- any - the type could not be determined and so could be anything, this is the default when no type is returned

```{.javascript caption="Checks to see if the attribute actually exists and returns the correct type"}
const { getAttribute } = require("skeem-common")

function myPassableOperation({ model, value }) {
  const attribute = getAttribute(model, "name")
  return { value: `"${attribute.name}" = '${value}'`, type: "boolean" }
}
```

It should also be noted that this is a poor use of a custom operation. This operation does not achieve anything that you could not do with the built in operations. Although it does save a few characters, it adds on additional knowledge needed by other people working on a project, the need for testing, and another function which would need maintaining over the life time of the project. Operations should only be added to achieve results which are either not possible with the pre-existing functions or highly impracticle to achieve.

#### Nested operations

It is very common for an operation to need to accept an operation object as its value. If you could not compile nested operations then you would not be able to create functions like: `eq`, `lt`, `and`, `not`. This would make things a little tricky. Therefore, along with model and query you also get supplied with a function named `compile`. This function accepts an operation and returns the `{value, type}` object.

```{.javascript caption="A simple implementation of the eq operaion."}
const { getAttribute } = require("skeem-common")

function simpleEq({ compile, value }) {
  const left = compile(value[0])
  const right = compile(value[1])
  return { value: `${left.value} = ${right.value}`, type: "boolean" }
}
```

#### The request context

the final argument passed to an operation is `ctx`. This is the current context for the request. With this it is possible to access infomation such as app configuration, the current session, and the database connection.

TODO

#### Using an operation plugin

To use an operation you first must create a javascript file within the `<skeem root>/operations`. The name of this file does not matter and can be anything. This javascript file must have a default export of an object where the keys are the names of the operations and their values are the functions as described above.

```{.javascript caption="A full operation plugin file"}

module.exports = {
  isANumber: function({ value }) {
    if (typeof value === 'number') {
      return { value: true, type: 'boolean' }
    } else {
      return { value: false, type: 'boolean' }
    }
  }
}

// Usage:

fetch:   {
  articles: {
    filter: {
      { isANumber: 123 }
    }
  }
}
```
