## Technologies

Skeem takes advantage of many existing technologies in order to provide its functionality. This section acts as an overview of the key technologies used.

### Typescript

Due to Skeem having to provide the functionality to a website, using javascript was a must.

Typescript is a superset of javascript which adds typing capabilities to the ordinarily dynamic language [@typescript]. This typing information allows compile-time code checking, which greatly assists in improving the reliability of code; helping to ensure against common trivial bugs. Typescript is transpiled into standard, es5 compliant, javascript meaning it can run on all modern browsers. This compatibility is essential because if Skeem only supported the latest version of Google Chrome, then it would eliminate the possibility of using the system on any website having compatibility requirements.

Typescript also aids other developers using the system as the typing information is used in most modern IDEs to supply IntelliSence information allow features such as auto-completion, inline errors messages, and hints for expected arguments and returns.

### NodeJS

NodeJs is a javascript runtime designed to build scalable network application [@nodejs]. NodeJs was a logical choice as it allowed writing server code also in javascript, which allowed for the construction of consistent interfaces. It is also much easier to develop a system when writing in a single language as less mental energy exerted to convert from one environment to another.

### Postgres

Postgres is a object-relational database system [@postgres]. Postgres has powerful, inbuilt JSON processing capabilities. It allows for storing JSON objects natively as well as writing queries which inspect the contents of JSON. More importantly, Postgres allows for the construction of JSON objects with queries themselves. This ability makes Postgres a very logical choice when the goal is to create trees of data as the database can pre-format the response greatly reducing the need for much post-query processing.

Another feature which Postgres offers is an optimiser which can automatically transform subqueries into join statements. This optimisation is taken advantage of in Skeem as there is not a single joining statement throughout the codebase. The chapter on fetch query SQL generation covers reasons for this further.

Postgres also provides the ability to write custom database functions relatively quickly. These functions help to encapsulate intricate pieces of reusable logic and are optimised by Postgres in order to maintain performant queries. Several places throughout Skeem uses them, such as to format responses of fetch requests.

### Jest

Jest is a testing framework which allows for the creating of automated tests [@jest]. It provides a simple interface to perform assertions concerning the code and is an essential tool used to prevent feature regression on such a large project. Section \ref{sec_testing} details the writing of these tests.

### Other Libraries and Services

Skeem also takes advantage of many prebuilt libraries and services.

NPM
: is the defacto package manager for node [@npm], it provides secure hosting and distribution of node packages and is the method Skeem uses to manage its publications.

Pusher
: is a web service specialised in providing real-time functionality to applications [@pusherjs]. It provides simple wrappers are web sockets as well as fallbacks to ensure compatibility across, even outdated, browsers. Skeem uses Pusher to send messages to clients in order to enable the live updating capabilities.

Amazon Web Services
: are a cloud computing platform[@aws] which provides relatively affordable file hosting. Skeem utilises its capabilities in its file storage functions.

GitHub
: is a distributed code platform which hosts git repositories. Many features are provided for assisting with project development, one of which is the issue tracker, here, users can raise issues concerning the project. This allows a unified place for developers to track bugs that were discovered and also to make requests for features.

Docsify
: is a system which allows for a documentation website to be created automatically from markdown files placed in a Git repository on GitHub. Having the documentation hosted alongside the code greatly encouraged and aided with keeping the guides and descriptions up to date.
