## Project Structure

Due to the size of the Skeem codebase (pushing 12'000 lines) and the range of environments, it runs on (server and the client). It was essential to split up the project into logical parts. However, full isolation is undesirable as each section has a tight coupling of the interactions, e.g. if the format of the fetch response changes then the server must update this new change as well as the client code to keep the format consistent from a developers point of view. Due to this, the structure of the project is that of a monorepo.

> "A monorepo is a software development strategy where code for many projects are stored in the same repository" [@monorepo_definition].

Then using a tool named Lerna, I was able to manage the projects simultaneously. Lerna automatically resolves the dependency order so, for instance, when attempting to build the project it knows that A depends on B which depends on C and therefore wait for A to build before moving on to B then finishing with C.

Skeem is broken up into seven packages, five directly related packages, each prefixed with "skeem", specific to Skeem and two auxiliary packages which were extracted and can provide useful functionality independently:

### Skeem Packages

These packages include the core functionality specific to skeem. Each package name is prefixed with "skeem-".

- The **server** package contains the majority of the logic; including the implementation for processing requests, creating a database, session authentication, creating migrations, starting a server, and many other tasks.
- The **CLI** is an interface used to interact with the functions provided by the server.
- The **GUI** is a second interface to execute server functions but takes a graphical approach.
- The **client** holds functionality allowing websites to execute queries in an application.
Finally, the **common** package contains utilities shared between the packages, for example, the error messages.

#### Auxilary Packages

These packages provide key functionality to many parts of Skeem but were extracted from the main core due to the generalized utility they offer.

The **es-qu-el** package provides many helper functions concerning SQL, including methods to sanitize values and build complex queries.
**Typer** contains utility functions for type-checking unknown variables. By declaring a schema of the data structure expects, Typer can analyze objects and find how they differ and offer error messages accordingly.
**Overseer** is a declarative CLI generator used to power Skeem's CLI.
