## Database Management

### skeem-\* Tables

Skeem relies on a handful of datebase tables in order to function. Each of these tables are prefixed with "skeem-" in order to differentiate them from application specific tables.

skeem-schema
: Stores the applications schema

skeem-migrations
:Stores a list of all migrations

skeem-sessions
:stores a list of sessions, including what record the session was for, when the session was created, when the last activity for the user occurred and what session provider was used to authenticate.

skeem-images
:stores references for files uploaded to Skeem

skeem-version
:stores the current database version

### Functions

Skeem also relies on a few custom functions in order to properly handle certain requests.

### Upgrading the Database

In order to accomadate new functionalitty it is likely the features of the database may have to change, new tables may be required, old tables may need to columns, etc. In order to facility this need skeem provides a database upgrade mechanism.

This upgrade system works by keeping track of a database version number and a list of steps on how to upgrade from one version to another. When the server is started the current version number is loaded from the database and compared to the most highest upgrade number available. If these are equal the database is fully up to data and the system proceeds as normal. If however they are different the database goes through the update process.

The update process involves iterating through all upgrade steps starting from the current version number counting up until all steps have been executed. After each step the version number is updated in order to keep it in sync with the database state allowing for the possibility of an error within the upgrade step.

As of the time of writing there are 6 upgrade stages (starting from 0). These stages perform the following:

0. Check to see if the database exists, if it does not the attempt to create it.
1. Install neccessary extensions, setup tables, initialize empty schema.
1. Rename tables from "cord-_" to "skeem-_" (The project under went a renaming to prevent conflicts with previous systems) and add columns `exectued` and `timestamp` to the migrations table.
1. updating the schema format to accomadate some new features.
1. Create response formatting functions to remove inconsistencies of certain edge case requests.
1. Add a `loggedOut` column to the sessions table. previously sessions were deleted.

When creating a new application the version number would attempt to be loaded but an error would be thrown as no database would exist. This error is caught and the version number is deemed to be -1. This means that when creating a new application by simply starting the server a database will be created automatically (as step 0 would execute). This greatly improves the time to setup and start using a Skeem application.
