## Database Usage

Skeem utilizes a single postgres database in order to store and query for its data. Skeem fully manages this database and is responsible for create all of its tables and extensions.

### skeem-\* Tables

Skeem relies on a handful of predefined database tables in order to function. To differentiate these tables from application specific ones, their name is prefixed with "skeem-", and application tables are prohibited from using this prefix.

skeem-schema
: Stores the applications schema

skeem-migrations
:Stores a list of all migrations

skeem-sessions
:stores a list of sessions, including what record the session was for, when the session was created, when the last activity for the user occurred and what session provider was used to authenticate.

skeem-files
:stores references and information for uploaded files

skeem-version
:stores the current database version

### Functions {#database_functions}

Skeem also relies on a few custom functions in order to provide certain features. These functions, like the tables, are all prefixed with "skeem-". This is done entirely for future proofing the application as custom functions are not possible to create as of the time of writing.

The `skeem-array_to_object` function accepts an JSON array as input and outputs an object with the indices becoming keys. The object also has a length property defined. In practise, this function would transform `[1,2,3]` into `{0: 1, 1: 2, 2: 3, length: 3}`. This is used for formatting paginated requests, specifically it allows for the `recordCount` variable to be added to the object. Then in javascript the objects prototype to be that of the built in array. This results in an object with a `recordCount` property which has all the same functionality as a standard array. All constructed within a single database query.

The `skeem-format_results_as_object_with_count` function takes two queries as input, the first returning an array of records and the second returning a count. This function will call the `skeem-array_to_object` function on the results of the first query and add the `recordCount` property being the result of the second query.

### Upgrading the Database

In order to accommodate new functionality over time the database will likely have to change, new tables may be required, old tables may need to columns, etc. In order to facility this need skeem provides a database upgrade mechanism.

This upgrade system works by keeping track of a database version number and a list of steps on how to upgrade from one version to another. When the server is started the current version number is loaded from the database and compared to the most highest upgrade number available. If these are equal the database is fully up to data and the system proceeds as normal. If however they are different the database goes through the update process.

The update process involves iterating through all upgrade steps starting from the current version number counting up until all steps have been executed. After each step the version number is updated in order to keep it in sync with the database state allowing for the possibility of an error within the upgrade step.

As of the time of writing there are 6 upgrade stages (starting from 0). These stages perform the following:

0. Check to see if the database exists, if it does not the attempt to create it.
1. Install neccessary extensions, setup tables, initialize empty schema.
1. Rename tables from "cord-_" to "skeem-_" (The project under went a renaming to prevent conflicts with pre-existing systems) and add columns `exectued` and `timestamp` to the migrations table.
1. updating the schema format to accomadate some new features.
1. Create response formatting functions to remove inconsistencies of certain edge case requests.
1. Add a `loggedOut` column to the sessions table. previously sessions were deleted.

When creating a new application the version number would attempt to be loaded but an error would be thrown as no database would exist. This error is caught and the version number is deemed to be -1. This means that when creating a new application by simply starting the server a database will be created automatically (as step 0 would be the next to be execute). This greatly improves the time required to setup and start using a Skeem application.
