## Compiling Operators {#compiling_operators}

Operators take the form of object functions and are predominantly used to convey calculations for use in the scopes and permissions of models as well as the filter of fetch queries. Though they have started to spread to other aspects of the system, such as a fetches sort or a mutations setters.

Each operator handler function accepts a context object (see section \ref{context_object}), a model to act on, and the value supplied in the object. They must return a SQL string and a data type that the SQL will produce, such as number or boolean. The SQL will be placed in a query where the from clause relates to the model passed to the operator.

```{.javascript caption="The return of an operator function"}
{ value: 'SQL STRING', type: 'boolean' }
```

Many operator functions accept other operator objects as their value. For this reason, the functions are also supplied with a function which can be used to compile an operator tree. By composing multiple operators complex trees of calculations can be created to perform a wide variety of actions. Skeem provides a number of built in operators designed to fulfill many use cases.

### Comparison Operators

Comparison operators are a collection of functions which compare two values. For a value they accept an array which contains two elements, both of which must be operator objects. Both arguments are compiled to produce their sql strings and then concatenated with an appropriate boolean operation. The available comparisons are:

lt
: arg1 < arg2

lte
: arg1 <= arg2

gt
: arg1 > arg2

gte
: arg1 >= arg2

eq
: arg1 == arg2

If the compiled arguments are of the same type then the comparison operators will return a type of boolean. If, however, the types are different then an optimization is performed, where by the returned SQL will simply be the value of `false` with a return type to match. This can be done because if the types are different then it cannot be true; a string is not less than a number therefore `{lt: [string, number]}` is always false. Doing this can simplify the final SQL query as the database will not need to perform these comparisons.

The `eq` operator performs a slightly more complex function. Databases treat `NULL` values as distinct from all other values including other `NULL` values. Because of this the SQL produced by the `eq` operator actually takes the form of `a = b OR (a is NULL AND b is NULL)`. It is features such as this which help make skeem more user friendly as it removes the need to know this fact about `NULL` values for SQL.

### Control Operators

In order to combine different operations skeem provides three control operators.

The `and` operations take an array of operation objects, compiles each of them, and then joins their SQL statements with the keywords `AND`. The function also analyzes the return types of their elements in order to perform an optimization. The `and` operator checks to see if _any_ of the returns are explicitly false, if so then the operator will simply return the SQL of `false`. if, however, _all_ of the returns are `true`, then the operator will return `true` (this is because `X and true = X`). If neither of these conditions are met then the operator will filter out all true values and combine the remaining values with `AND`.

The `or` operation acts in a similar manner, except joins its statements with the `OR` keyword. This operator also performs similar optimizations: if _all_ are `false` then `false` is returned, if _any_ are `true` then `true` is returned, else all `false` values are filtered out and the remaining joined together (`X OR FALSE = X`).

The `not` operator accepts a single operator object as its value, compiles it and then returns prefaces the SQL with the `NOT` keyword. This operator has the return type of `boolean` unless the compiled value has a type of `true` or `false`. In these cases the return type is set to be `false` or `true` respectively.

### Leaf Operators

Skeem providers operators which can inject values into the computation. The operator objects can be thought of as a tree of operations, in this case these value injecting operations would be the leaves.

The `value` operator is the simplist of these operations, simply accepting any primitive as its value (string, number, or boolean) and injects it into the SQL. This value is also sanitized to prevent SQL injection.

The `attr` operator is probably the most useful operator skeem offers. It accepts the name of an attribute, and returns the SQL necessary for reading the value. For most attributes it simply returns the name of the attribute as this matches the column name. In the case of, associations, however it returns a fully formed sub-query which returns all the associated record ids.

The `param` operator is used exclusively by operator objects defined within scopes. Params can act as arguments for scopes, allowing for scopes such as `newThanDate` where it accepts a date as an argument. The `param` operator looks at the request for a param who's name matches the value, then sanitizes the value then returns it as a value.

The `id` operator returns the id of the current record. This is needed as because `id` cannot be passed to the `attr` operator, as it is technically not an attribute.

The `now` operator returns the sql of `NOW()` allowing queries to be written which use the current date.

### Association Operators

There are several operators dedicated to working with the association attribute type.

The `empty` operator accepts an operator object and then will returns a boolean indicating whether the result has any results.

The `anyIn` operator accepts an attribute name (which must be an has many association) and a operator object named `query`. This operator compiles the `query` in the context of the given attributes model. Then checks if there are any records which exist in both the query results and the association.

The `associationEquals` operator accepts an `attribute` property denoting a has many association attribute and an array of `ids`. The returned SQL checks if the associated record ids equals the array of supplied ids.

The `path` operator accepts an array of strings. This array denotes a path traversing a set of associations such as `article > author > address > city > name`. Each element therefore must be the name of an attribute which is a has one association for the model that the previous element lead to (the first must be in the context of the main model for the query). The last element, however, can be any attribute for the model.

### Miscellaneous Operators

Skeem also provides a few operators which do not really fit within the other categories.

`like` is an operator which accepts two operator objects. Each one is compiled and then used as the left and right hand sides of the `ILIKE` keyword (case-insensitive like). Each side must be of type string when compiled.

The `ids` operator is accepts an array of strings, the SQL returned checks if the current records id is in the supplied array. This operator was one of the first to be implemented and is now marked for depreciation. Instead it is preferred to use an `or` operator containing multiple `eq` comparison of an `id` and a `value` operator. Although this may, potentially, be a greater number of operators, very rarely is `ids` used for more then a single id. This operator was implemented before the creation of the `id` operator so passing `{ ids: [1] }` was the only way to find a specific record. Removing this operator serves to remove the amount of things required to learn to understand Skeem and also eliminates redundant choice from the developer.

The `scope` operator lets you call a scope defined on the model. It accepts the name of the scope and an object containing the parameters to be passed to said scope. This operator simply loads the scope from the model and calls the compile function on the scopes query.

Finally the `query` operator accepts an entire fetch query as its value, complete with a new model. This is useful in combination with some of the association operators.
