## Mutations {#mutation_sec}

Like fetch requests, mutations construct and execute a single database query. This is always true independently of how many tables are being affected. This is achieved by the use of a data-modifying common table expression (CTE). A CTE acts an auxiliary queries for the use of the main statement [@ctes]. They are can be thought of as sub-queries which execute independently.

### DbChange Object

Throughout the parsing of a mutation request a single object, called `DbChange`, is added to, similar to the `SelectQuery` used by the fetch request. This object holds all the relevant information regarding a database change, this not only includes the actual updates to tables but also validations that must be performed and tasks which must execute.

```{.json caption="An empty changes object."}
{
  "currentKey": 0,
  "waitFor": {
    "before": [],
    "after": []
  },
  "tables": {},
  "returns": [],
}
```

The `currentKey` is used to assign every CTE a unique identifies, this can then be used by others to refer to the results of a query. After every use, it is incremented.
The `waitFor` key holds an array of tasks, in the form of asynchronous functions, which must be executed either before or after the query has occurred.
The `returns` array contains a list of objects which will formulate the final response.
The `tables` object holds data concerning the actual changes to the tables, the keys in this object represent the name of the table being altered and the value is a list of `DbChangeRecords`.

### DbChangeRecord

A `DbChangeRecord` holds information pertinent to a single row in the database. Each record has a queryKey which is unique to the `DbChange` object. This queryKey can be used to refer to the records return value. Following this, the record stores an array of properties that should be returned.

If the record is designed to update or destroy an existing row then it will contain an `id` property holding the id of the concerned row. If this `id` property is missing then the record is assumed to be creating a new row.

Records have an object containing the values of the columns to be modified. The value can either be a primitive (string, number, boolean) or an object function. The available options of this object function are:

- `now` which will return the current date.
- `session` which will return the id of the current user.
- `raw` which will allows SQL to be passed as the value.
- `queryKey` this will automatically pull the id from the result of the change with the matching queryKey.

Records also contain an array which can hold `validations`. These validation functions get passed the record and have the option to add errors to an `errors` object held by the record.

### Processing a Query

Mutations start by type checking the general structure of the request. It is ensured to be an object with a single key, this key must the name of a model within the schema. The value in the object must be an object or an array, if it is an object then it is wrapped to become an array. If these checks fail then a malformedRequest error is thrown.

The queries values is an array of _change actions_ to be made. For each change a handler function is executed which appends the necessary information to the `DbChange` object.

After all the changes have been processed the changes object runs all of the before tasks. These tasks are asynchronous actions which must occur before any SQL can be executed. This is usually because the action will add additional data to the changes object. An example of a before action can be seen when uploading an image. The image attributes setter creates a beforeAction which will store the file in the relevant location and then modify the changes object with the reference string.

Next the validations are performed. This involves iterating over every record in the tables object and calling each validation function for each. If, after running the validations, any record has a non-empty errors object then a validation error is thrown and the mutation aborted.

Finally the SQL is generated, executed, and its response returned.

### Change Actions

There are three change actions that can be performed: create, update, and destroy. Each action will create a new `DbChangeRecord` and adds it to the `DbChange` for the table specified by the current model.

The **create** action iterates over **all** the attributes for the model and invokes all of their `set` methods. The `set` method is detailed in section \ref{attributes_sec}.

The **update** action first ensures an `id` property is present in the data specified. If not, a malformedRequest error is thrown. The action then goes through **only** the attributes which have a new value specified, calling the `set` method on each.

The **destroy** action performs the same check for the `id` property and then sets the `shouldDestroy` flag to true.

### SQL Generation

Generating the SQL from a `DbChange` object starts by converting each record to its own, independent, query.

This starts by transforming the attributes into a list of columns and sanitized SQL values. The attributes are stored as an object where the keys represent the column names. If the value is a primitive then this is simply sanitized as a SQL value. If, the value, it is in the format `{now: true}` then it is replaced by the SQL of `NOW()`. If it is instead a reference to a queryKey, then it is converted to the SQL of `SELECT id FROM {queryKey}`.

The type of query depends on a number of different factors for each record.

If the record has its `shouldDestroy` flag marked, then a delete query is generated:

```{.sql}
  DELETE FROM {tableName}
  WHERE id={record id}
```

Else if the record does not have an id, then a insert query is formed:

```{.sql}
  INSERT INTO {tableName} (columns)
  VALUES (values)
  RETURNING id
```

If neither of these conditions are met then an update query is created:

```{.sql}
  UPDATE {tableName}
  SET {column=value for each attribute}
  WHERE id={record id}
  RETURNING id
```

Next these individual queries are combined into a single query. The queryKeys for each record become the alias for the sub-query:

```{.sql}
  WITH RECURSIVE
    {queryKey} AS ({record SQL})
  SELECT {processed returns}
```
