## Sessions and Authentication {#permissions_sec}

These methods of authentication are referred to generally as session providers (they provide methods for authentication sessions).

Session providers define a name, model, a type and some configuration dependant on the type selected.

The **name** is used purely to distinguish between different providers and allows for multiple authentication strategies of the same type. You may have two distinct user sets which are authenticated with different models, e.g. for a school system there may be one user authentication strategy for teachers and another for pupils.
The model defines where the session provider should look to find the necessary data to check against any credentials provided.

The **type** defines which session provider to use. Skeem comes with three built-in providers: local, Facebook, and Google.

The local provider authenticates users by storing some identifying attribute and a password in the database itself. Then when an authentication request is made, the database is queried for a record with the specified credentials. If a record is found, then Skeem authenticates the user as that record. The user attribute is most commonly an email address or a username. The password is stored securely using a secure hashing algorithm.

The Facebook and Google providers allow users to authenticate using these services via the familiar "login with XXX" buttons. These providers can specify a list of attributes to extract from the service such as name, email, image.

### OAuth Providers

When authenticating with an OAuth provider, the system will first generate a URL for the given service. This URL is presented to the user, which after following, will present a form allowing them to log in to the service and grant access to necessary information such as their name and email. After the form has been submitted, the Skeem application will receive an access token.

This token is then used to retrieve the user's personal information, including a unique ID.

Part of the configuration in the schema for session providers is a reference to an attribute on the users model responsible for store the user's ID obtained from the third party service. The system uses this attribute detects if this user has been seen previously, if so then they are authenticated as this record. If, however, no such user exists, then the system will attempt to match them via their email address.

If no user is found, then one must be created. Each provider, in the schema, defines an information map. This map provides a mapping from information obtained from the provider to attributes on the system. A new record is created using this map to populate data such as the user's name and email. Finally, a session is created for this new user.


### Authenticating

After a provider has identified a record, a session must be created. A session is merely a row in the `skeem-sessions` table, which holds a token, an ID of a record, the provider that identified the record, and whether the session is still active.

A new row is created in the table for the identified record, and a token is generated securely. This token is then encrypted using the JWT standard and a secret key help within the configuration. The encrypted token can then be sent to the client, and upon returning will be decrypted and used to identify the authentication record.

### Roles and Permissions

Roles consist of a name and a query. The name is a globally unique value identifying what the role is called, such as "admin". The query takes the form of an operator tree which is executed in the context of the model holding the user information. If the operator is truthy, then the current user has that role.

Each model can define a set of permissions. Each permission lists what role they relate to, what action the permission is for (e.g. fetching, updating, creating) and also an operator tree defining what records can be accessed by the role.

Processing permissions for a model starts by selecting all the relevant operator trees which pertain the current user's roles. If _all_ of the permission scope is explicitly false, then the query is aborted, an empty result set is returned. If _any_ of the scopes is explicitly true, then the permissions are skipped as the user has access to all the records. Finally, if neither of the conditions is met, then the false values are filtered (false or X = X) and the remaining values are combined with the `or` operator and appended to the queries filters.
