## File Management {#file_providers}

Skeem defines a file as being an object with the following properties:

name
: a human supplied name, ideally descriptive such as "Home Banner"

filename
: the actual filename being uploaded e.g "homeBanner.png"

mime
: is the format of the file, this is a standard defined by IANA.

data
: is a buffer containing the binary data of the file.

Every file that gets stored by skeem consists of a row in the database and the file data.

### File Data

Storing the file data is the job of the File handlers. A file handler is comprised of two functions, `store` and `retrieve`. In Skeems configuration object there is an option to specify which handler should be when storing new files.

The `store` function gets supplied a file in the form of a buffer object. It must store this data somewhere and return a reference string. The `retrieve` function well later get given the reference string, which is then used to locate the file and then return a stream of the data.

Skeem provides two built in file handlers:

- The **local** handler stores files in the local filesystem - ideal for development. It automatically generates a filename based on the given files name and the current timestamp. This filename is then checked for uniqueness in the filesystem and then used as the reference string.
- The **AWS** handler places files on in an AWS bucket for which the connection information is held in the configuration object. After uploading an image, Amazon returns a unique identifier for the given file which is used as the reference.

### File Information

All the file information, including the name, filename, and mime type is stored within the `skeem-files` table in the database.

After a file handler has stored an image, the returned reference string is stored in the database along side the other file information as well as the name of the file handler responsible for the storage. By storing the file handlers name you are able to change what the default file handler whilst still maintaining the ability to retrieve previously uploaded images.

This row also contains a token field which is automatically securely generated to a random string. This token is used for retrieving a file and its information and is what is returned by the image attribute.

## Retrieving a file {#ret_file_sec}

When retrieving a file, the generated token string must be supplied. This token is then used to find the relevant row within the `skeem-files` table. After this row is found, the reference string and the handlers name are extracted. The relevant handler then has its retrieve method called, passing it the reference string. This then returns a stream of the file data.
