## Plugins

Plugins allow skeem to cover a much wider use case then would likely be possible if I had to implement all edge cases manually. By forcing system features to use a plugin style system it helps to better define the edges of systems and to creating cleaner more targeted sub-systems. This helps to prevent the core of skeem to become bloated with extremely specific features (how).

> Note: There are examples of very specific features within the code base such as the `associationEquals` operation. It was, in fact, the addition of features such as this which prompted the need for the plugin system.

Every pluggable feature (attributes, session providers, operators and file handlers) all work off the same abstracted code and each one simply specifies a set of configuration. The abstracted code handles the file loading and parsing and exposes key functions to the specific implementations.

Each pluggable feature specifies the following:

name
: this is used when logging debug information.

builtinsFolder
: this specify the name of the folder where the built in features can be located.

folderName
: the folder name of where the external plugins will be located relative to the application root.

validateExports
: a function which will get passed a file when it has been imported and parsed. This function should return a boolean indicating whether the exported contents of the file is valid. For instance checking whether a file handler contains a store and retrieve method.

merge
: a function responsible for merging all the individual files together into one final object.

Abstracting the plugin system like this helped to enforce a consistent plugin style (which can aid developers when writing plugins), reduce duplicated complexity, and to isolate a critical system feature to be tested separately.

```{.javascript caption="The code required to define the attribute plugin system"}
export const loadAttributes = createPluginLoader<IAttribute>({
  name: "attributes",
  builtinsFolder: "./builtins",
  folderName: CUSTOM_ATTRIBUTES_PATH,
  validateExports(_filename, exps) {
    // attributes should be an object with three keys: "migrate", "get", "set"

    if (!isObject(exps)) {
      return false
    }

    const expectedKeys = ["migrate", "get", "set"]
    const isValid = Object.keys(exps).every(key => expectedKeys.includes(key))
    return isValid
  },
  merge(acc, filename, exps) {
    acc[filename] = exps
    return acc
  }
})
```

Loading a plugin executes the following algorithm:

1. combine the `builtinsFolder` variable and the directory the function was defined in, in order to find the full path for the built ins.
2. if this path doesnt exist, then skip steps 2-6.
3. load a list of all files in this directory.
4. for each javascript file require it
5. pass the contents to the validateExports method along with the file name. If this function returns false, throw an error
6. otherwise, store the contents along with the file name in an array.
7. combine the `folderName` variable and skeems root directory to gain a full path for where external elements are stored.
8. repeat steps 2-6 using this new path.
9. for each element in the loaded array, pass it to the merge function.
10. return the result of the merge.

When skeem is started it calls all the loaded functions created by the plugin system. These functions will then load all the built elements and any external ones, merge them, and then store them with the manager. Then when a component wants to use one of the plugagble elements it references it through the manager.

## Attributes

## Operator

## Session Provider

- just talk about them in the context of wanting to implement twitter

## File Handlers
