\label{testing}

# Testing

Tests are an essential part of any software project especially those providing some critical functionallity to users - Skeem is no exception.

Tests were written in Jest.

- Tests were written in jest.
- Tests targeted functionality rather then implementation. However tests were written for smaller parts of the system when functionality became too complex or when the underlying functions were critical - such as loading the schema from the database.
- For a complete list of all tests please see the apendix.
- CI
  - Due to skeem being used in production it was essential that it was not only tested but that testing was constantly carried out. By using CircleCI tests are automatically run when a change deployed to the git repository.
- Coverage
  - Code coverage reports show how many lines of the are touched by the tests this is very useful to ensure all the code branches are tested and perform as expected.
  - Code coverage ended up at 46% at the end of the project.
- Code quality
  - Codeclimate is a service which analyzes code and detects “code smells”. “A code smell is any characteristic in the source code of a program that possibly indicates a deeper problem.” - Wikipedia. This includes problems such as:
    - Cognitive complexity: how complicated is the code to understand.
    - File and function length: does the file or function contain too many lines (only counting actual lines of code, ie. not comments or blank lines)
    - Duplication: are large parts of the code duplicated in multiple places
  - Codeclimate then predicts the amount of time it would take to fix this technical debt. At the project end, skeem contained 147 code smells with a predicted clean up time of 2 months.
